---
Date Created: "2025-04-29 13:03"
Last Updated: "2025-04-29 13:03"
tags:
  - Belief
Index:
  - "[[Journals]]"
Topic: 
Status: Unweathered
Published: true
Author:
  - "[[Landon Dahle]]"
---
---
# *** DISCLAIMER: READ THE [[_README (b4 reading beliefs)|README]] ON MY BELIEFS BEFORE PERUSING ***

---

The talks of defunding the department of education (doe) struck fear into my heart for future generations. Acts like “School Choice” and the push towards privatized education were publicly framed as ways to allow for those underserved to have the choice to attend private schooling, an opportunity they wouldn’t otherwise have, an opportunity too good to pass up. This idealistic notion proves to be insecure upon further examination, however; if parents choose these private schools they inadvertently remove the ability of the public schools their children once utilized to support themselves, an outcome seemingly designed to cull the already underfunded public schools from existence. 

According to the [Texas Public School Finance Overview](https://tea.texas.gov/sites/default/files/texas-public-school-finance-overview.pdf), the funding of Tier One schools is based largely on Average Daily Attendance (ADA), the number of students enrolled at the school (and has been that way since ___ regardless of the rising associated costs due to economic volatility, but that’s another discussion). As such, when a student leaves, the public school loses funding — even if the school’s fixed costs (buildings, teachers, buses) stay the same. (TLDR: School choice can hollow out traditional schools without reducing their operating costs, leading to budget crises.) On a similar yet even more daunting note, students in programs like Special Education (SPED), Bilingual Education, Compensatory Education, and Career and Technical Education (CTE) come with extra funding weights to meet their needs. This means that if these students leave for charter schools or accept these private vouchers — if charters only selectively admit less expensive-to-educate students — public schools lose the weighted funding but retain the responsibility for the highest-need students left behind. (TLDR: Public schools become concentrated with higher-need, underfunded populations, worsening achievement gaps.) Furthermore, Programs like Transportation, New Instructional Facilities, and Early Education depend on having large enough populations. If enrollment drops from choice programs, it becomes too expensive to justify running a bus system, early education centers, or to build new facilities. Sparsity adjustments only partly solve this — districts will struggle when below critical mass. (TLDR: Fewer students means lost services for the kids who stay in public schools.) My final critique (for the very top level issues) is that vouchers and charters often require parental navigation, transportation, and sometimes upfront costs that lower-income families struggle with. Wealthier or more informed families exit first, taking not just their ADA but also community advocacy and political support with them. Public schools become de facto segregation zones for the poor, minorities, and disabled students. (TLDR: Instead of empowering all families, school choice can concentrate disadvantaged youth to public schools, likely condemning them to a life of further disadvantage.)

Despite these faults in need of addressing, however, there seems to be a silver lining; an opportunity to do better for our youth. I myself was a public school attendant, and feel slighted by my experiences within. The scale of these schools and the lack of funding resulted in the inability for teachers to spend meaningful one-on-one time with students, escalating issues like bullying, general disinterest, and ineffective learning especially among students with undiagnosed learning disabilities like myself during that time. 

The Heritage Foundation wrote a [very insightful report](https://www.heritage.org/education/commentary/here-are-10-reasons-school-choice-winning) on the potential benefits of the school choice that I will be utilizing to inform my counterargument. My understanding of the points made is as follows. On the concepts of freedom and customization: families can tailor education to student needs (e.g., disabilities, giftedness), requiring the family to take accountability for their children’s education—to "vote" with their feet and dollars. This could theoretically increase parental satisfaction, graduation rates, and civic outcomes stated (was shown to do so in a [case study from 2013 over the D.C. Opportunity Scholarship Program](https://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/EDFP_a_00083)), thus improving engagement, involvement, and happiness with their children’s education. However, this freedom dooms public schools further as they are bound by the archaic regulations imposed by years of systemic development. The framework proposes it could allow one to escape unsafe or failing schools and provide access to opportunities for low-income families by breaking zip-code-based barriers. I would argue that unless the policy covers relocation costs this does not necessarily apply to the intended audience, however; the rising costs of housing disallow this choice on a financial level, thus making the opportunities seemingly unachievable for those suffering from the ailments we aim to address. The proposed system is aimed at taxpayer savings and economic efficiency; vouchers/ESA programs are often cheaper than public schooling, yes, but putting the financial means back into the pockets of parents does not necessarily allow for the previously stated choices for those in positions where the reduction of taxes cannot permit action regardless. If implemented incorrectly this could strand a non-insignificant portion of our next generation of students rather than save them. 

The final and main point to this I want to address is that of market competition—where I see the silver lining and the beauty of the policy. By implementing the policy, the economy is utilized at scale to force all schools (public and private) to improve. That is where I believe we can step in; we can utilize the technology at our disposal to ensure that this transition can be beneficial for all, that we can use this opportunity of educational systemic reform to do just that: reform. 

The academy falls back all the way to ___ BCE, the ancient greeks and their epistemic philosophy laid the ground rules for academic pursuit, Plato and his interlocutors still have influence on our culture to this day. This brings forth two main concepts: that education is ancient and that we can do better. Dating things back to the time they were created and understanding them as such can go a long way; they thought the universe revolved around us for heaven’s sake (pun intended). Their philosophy was our foundation, and we have worked from there; but also who’s to say we did a good job? Or that they did a good job? With the technology at our disposal we can patch the flaws of the models as we deem fit; specifically that of scale. The ancient Greeks had no concept of the internet, therefore they couldn’t design an education system around it! But we do, can, and should. We are globally interconnected! We can solve academic and systemic issues with only our minds (as I hope to exemplify). We each (assuming you have a smartphone) own computers orders of magnitude faster and more computationally advanced than that which brought us to the moon that can fit into the palms of our hands! It’s time we realized the power we truly hold and utilized the systems we have access to to make the world an even better place.

But change must start with education: how we learn, how we think, and how we live. All of our problems boil down to education when you think about it; childhood development in specific has such a strong hold on the people we become. See [[Exploitation within Capitalism]] for continuation.